Who was Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose?

Subhas Chandra Bose was the nationalist who initiated the organized armed struggle for India's independence from the British Empire, seeking the help of Germany and Japan.

Jailed 11 times in his life, Netaji stood up to advocate for Poorna Swaraj  (complete freedom) when the Congress Committee was fine with getting independence in phases through a Dominion status.

Bose was made the president of the Indian National Congress twice, defeating Mahatma Gandhi's nominee. He was also the founder of the Indian National Army.

 

A gem of a child
Netaji was born to Prabhavati Devi and Janakinath Bose, an advocate, on January 23, 1897, in the Bengal Province of Orissa's Cuttack.

As the ninth child among 14 siblings, Netaji was fondly called Ranga in his family.

Always a brilliant student, Netaji attained an overall second position in his matriculation examination and joined the Presidency College in 1911. He was, however, expelled later for assaulting a professor named EF Oaten, who had made some anti-India comments.



Netaji went on to complete his BA degree in Philosophy from Scottish Church College under the University of Calcutta in 1918. The following year, he got admission at the Fitzwilliam College in Cambridge to appear in the Indian Civil Services Examination.

Although he cracked the examination with a fourth ranking and secured a lucrative job, as was his father's wish, Netaji could not bring himself up to serve the British government.

So instead, he returned to India and joined the Indian National Congress to take part in the Independence struggle.

 

His marriage to Emily Schenkl
In June 1934, during his visit to Germany, a mutual friend introduced Netaji to Emilie Schenkl, the daughter of an Austrian veterinarian, whom he went on to hire for her English and typing skills to help him write his book, The Indian Struggle.

Some eight years later, Netaji proposed to Emillie, following which the two got married in a secret Hindu ceremony in January 1942. That year, in November, Emillie gave birth to their daughter, Anita.


In a letter dated March 12, 1946, Emilie wrote to Netaji's older brother, Sarat Chandra Bose, about their marriage. However, Sarat Chandra Bose is said to have not received this letter until two years later:

"Your brother asked me when I was in Berlin if I would accept his proposal to marry him. Knowing him since years as a man of good character and since there was a mutual understanding and we were very fond of each other, I agreed. The only difficulty was to get the necessary marriage permission from the German Government...we decided to settle it between ourselves and got, therefore, married according to Hindu fashion in January 1942.... On November 29, 1942, a daughter was born to us."

In 1948, after Netaji's death in the plane crash, Sarat Chandra Bose and his family visited Emilie in Vienna. Since then began a fond relationship between the two families.


Emillie would write to Sarat Chandra Bose about how little Anita was growing up, and about her hope of her husband returning someday.

Emillie, who could not accept Netaji's death, wrote to Sarat Chandra Bose in 1949 saying, "We can only hope that our feelings may become reality and one day that your brother will return. This is the only thing I am praying for."



Netaji's only child, Anita Bose Pfaff
Born in Vienna on November 29, 1942, Anita grew up using her mother's maiden name.

In her letters to Sarat Chandra Bose, Emillie would write about Anita's reaction to the movie  Jungle Book, who was "was frightened because of the tiger and snakes, but she liked the elephants very much".

Anita went on to become a German economist, a professor at the University of Augsburg and also a politician.

She wrote a biography on her father titled Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose and Germany, which depicts interesting facts about his life and contribution to India's freedom struggle.



His living family
Apart from his daughter, Netaji has been survived by three grandchildren: Peter Arun, Maya Karina, and Thomas Krishna.

His nephew Sisir Bose's wife, Krishna Bose, is a politician and social worker in West Bengal. She has three children, Sumantra, Sharmila and Sugata Bose.
